[WATER WAVES CRASHING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Long ago, when the Earth
was just lava, rock, and ocean,
something happened in the water,
something flickered to life.
It came at first like the
mist atop an emerging wave,
just the first expression
of a building momentum.
And in time, a massive
wave of life energy
lifted from those oceans
and covered the planet
in a blanket of life forms.
Life emerged there
in those oceans,
and it expresses itself now
wherever there is water.
It's almost as if this
quality of aliveness
is just a glint that
shines through the water
in all things.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[WATER RUNNING]
This is quite a
time to be alive.
The conditions that
make life possible
are changing very
quickly, all the species
going extinct, the ecosystems
collapsing, the resource wars
and extreme weather events.
[GRIPPING INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC]
This is the era that I'm
coming of age with in.
And my life feels deeply
informed by the context
of this loss and change.
So four years ago, I went
searching for stories
of hope and healing.
And everything I found had
everything to do with water.
Before seeking out those
examples of healing,
I went to a place that
kind of encapsulates
this moment we're
in as a planet.
I joined a group of walkers
in the Owens Valley, which
is in the Eastern Sierras
of Southern California,
to walk three weeks next to
the Los Angeles Aqueduct.
You can see the
Owens Valley here
and the pipe running down to
Los Angeles, the Mexico border
down here, Oregon, SF.
>> You know what we know.
You know the plateau.
[NON-ENGLISH].
Grandfather, listen to me.
Listen to us.
[NON-ENGLISH].
Watch over our family.
>> Somehow in our walking, we
want to hold the whole story
and then listen.
As we'll begin this
day walking in silence,
really listen to
ourselves, to this place
and carry the questions
that are in our hearts
and that come to
us in the journey.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Walking Water is-- it's a
three-year experience and walk.
And we're going to follow all
the way down to Los Angeles.
And last year, we walked
together with the Owens River,
with the water.
And so this year, we're
walking next to a pipe, which
is the LA Aqueduct.
So we're pretty much 200
miles following this water
that has been enclosed.
How much grieving
is still there to be
done, to be heard on a
very collective basis?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In the early 1900s, LA
set the stage for the epic
metropolis it would become by
completing the LA Aqueduct.
The rivers and creeks
of the Owens Valley
were successfully diverted
into pipes that gravity fed
the city over 200 miles away.
They also drilled a
series of giant wells
into the Valley floor in
order to take water directly
from the aquifer.
At a dedication ceremony
on November 5th, 1913,
the principal engineer
behind the project,
William Mulholland, lifted
the gates and famously
said, "There it is.
Take it."
[LAUGHTER]
>> Ah, there.
There we go.
>> I just have a crazy knee that
wants to give out on me once
in a while.
So you can see, what we look
at now is a dry lake bed.
But you could imagine
this with water
all over it and everything
and people living in.
There's evidence that people
lived along these shores.
When my grandmother was a little
girl, she was told by her uncle
that you're going to see a
day when this lake is dry.
And everybody just laughed and
said there's no way they could.
This is 110 square
miles of water.
And the people said how in
heck could you ever dry out
this lake?
But she lived to see
this lake drying out.
[PENSIVE MUSIC]
>> That's what topography of the
Valley says that water is going
to flow off of the Sierra.
It's going to move
through the tributaries
and move into the Owens River.
And as it flows down
the Owens River,
it's going to end
up at Owens Lake.
That's what this water has
done since time immemorial.
And LA has the audacity to
think it's going to fully change
the natural scheme of things.
>> Depending on the year, the
Owens Valley supplies LA with
somewhere between 30% and
100% of its water needs.
And after more than a century
of this, a lot of the Valley,
which was once lush with life,
is now considered desert.
>> As groundwater lowers, the
vegetation that relies on that
groundwater is no longer
able to survive anymore.
And so the vegetation dies off.
And now you've created
a desert landscape.
>> The essential importance
in having vegetation remain
present and that the conditions
are viable for them to remain
present in a given landscape is
that cannot be overemphasized.
These landscapes
that are falling
into this degraded or
decertifying state,
they're no longer
capable of being
able to provide the basis for
a proper hydrological cycle.
[GRIPPING INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC]
>> The water cycle on planet
water is being broken.
>> The water that
falls over the oceans,
the rainfall is virtually 100%
a product of evaporation off
of the ocean.
>> Salty liquids becoming
distilled fresh water vapors
that come and congeal into
clouds and then can come back
down as solid snow, liquid rain,
or fog and then begin to either
infiltrate into the ground, be
taken up by plants and animals,
or move back through systems
while they erode out geology
and back to the ocean.
[RELAXING INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC]
There's a whole
other water cycle
that's based on the vegetation.
>> As you begin
to move over land,
you actually have water
that forms clouds through
the movement of
water through plants.
And as you move
further inland, a lot
of the water that falls
over large land masses
is from water that
moves through plants.
[RELAXING INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC]
>> The trees themselves
are pulling water from
the groundwater.
And they're sweating.
And they hydrate the
atmosphere, and then
that hydrated atmosphere goes
downwind and accumulates water
and rains itself.
And so in the Amazon,
there, the Amazon trees
can sweat, make rain.
Trees can sweat and make rain.
And they're making their
own rain within the forest.
>> Understanding the importance
of vegetation and the water
cycle is critical because there
comes a point to where if you
don't have any more plants,
there's no more vegetation.
You've got nothing left
really to transport
the water from the
ground to the atmosphere.
>> When we get
rid of vegetation,
we get rid of the water cycle.
And wherever that happens,
the amount of water
vapor in the atmosphere
of that place changes
dramatically, which eventually
sends the global climate
into an erosive spiral.
And how many Owens
Valleys are there?
How much of the Earth's
surface have we pumped dry?
How many places have we paved
over, plowed over, developed,
deforested, decertified?
Can we do modern human life
without this kind of impact?
[RELAXING INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC]
>> So here we are looking
at urbanized Los Angeles.
We've paved 2/3 of the city.
We have here a
typical neighborhood.
So you can see, it
wasn't evil intent
to create space for humans.
We did what we knew best.
Build our houses.
Put on our roofs.
When it rains,
the building codes
in place when we
built all of LA,
and only reversed within
the last 10 years,
said all water that falls
on the property must leave.
And so here it is coming
on the roof rain gutters
to the driveway to the street.
Imagine this is oil leaking
out of our car or a trash
flowing down the drains
into the storm drains.
Here it comes.
So this is what the LA
River now looks like,
and this is the water
flowing off to the ocean.
[PENSIVE MUSIC]
>> While Los Angeles is
taking water from the Colorado
and the Owens River
Valley and other places,
they're shedding just as much
water as they're sucking from
other places.
It's ridiculous.
And how ungrateful are they for
that which falls from the sky?
>> Many people think
we're living in a desert,
but we're not.
We on average receive
between 10 and 15 inches
of rainfall a year.
That 10 to 15 inches of rain
is adequate to meet our needs
in Los Angeles.
But because of the old
paradigm, the rain that falls
is thrown away, is removed.
During a drought last
year when we threw--
when it rained 9.6 inches,
we threw away over 30 billion
gallons or 9,100-and-something
gallons per person for each
of the 4 million people in LA
that could have been captured.
Had we done that, we would not
have to be taking the water.
[PENSIVE MUSIC]
[WHISTLING]
[IMITATING BIRD SOUNDS]
>> Yeah, I think
it is the Bullocks.
It's because it's orange,
and the bill is more oriole.
>> Yeah.
>> Wow.
>> Cool.
Wow.
>> I had seen it in the--
it's green.
>> Does he seem to
be talking about it?
[BIRDS CHIRPING]
>> So it turned out
there was foggy.
So much for Mr. Weatherman.
>> I know.
It looks foggy.
Instead of a sunny this
morning, it looks foggy to me.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[BIRDS CHIRPING]
What we promote
goes against what
a lot of conventional
engineering strategies are,
where it's about pipe
and pave and move water
as quickly in pipes
away from the landscape,
draining landscapes,
and we're the opposite.
We slow it down, take
the velocity out of it,
and spread it out
on the landscape,
and infiltrate it back
into the Earth, where
it's recharging
the aquifers again,
remembering our original
operating instructions of how
to be human again in a way that
is-- gives back more than what
we take.
>> This is where those
stories of hope come in.
How do we work with water
to support the conditions
for life?
>> The milkman.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[DOG BARKING]
>> Every time I drive past San
Antonio Creek and Thacher Creek
and the Ventura River and
I see that they're dry,
there's something within
me that calls out and says,
we can do better.
We can change that paradigm.
We can be better
stewards of water.
[GRIPPING INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC]
>> It isn't logical in any way
to be in a drought situation
and then let water just totally
pass us by when it comes.
Because the land is
so dry and compacted,
the water just runs off of it.
And soil-- this is actually
an interesting fact-- soil
will not receive water if
its temperature is higher
than the air temperature.
So if the soil is
hotter than the air,
it will just repel water.
So that's the situation
that we have here.
We have this dry,
barren landscape
that can't even receive
the water that falls on it.
And because of these slopes
that are so compacted
and some as compacted as roads
that are actually paved over,
it's just sending water away.
>> We're dealing with such
high-velocity water that has
such a cutting effect in the
landscape that we abruptly need
to slow it down and send
it on a longer journey.
>> What we're trying to do
is harvest all that runoff
and create structures that slow
the water down and get it back
into the soil again, which is
really the best place to store
large quantities of water.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[WATER RUNNING]
>> This is safe.
That is a dam 8 inches
deep over the spillway,
and it's about to go
over its emergency
spillway on the right side.
>> I hear it often that,
oh, it never rains in Ojai.
What's the point?
Even if we have a
low rainfall year
and we get between
10 and 15 inches,
this catchment area will
generate enough runoff
to put water in this pond and
possibly fill the whole thing.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hunter, when did
the storm start?
>> The storm started about
11 o'clock last night,
and it's about 4:30
in the afternoon.
This is called
Pacific Storm Lucifer.
It's bringing a
lot to light here.
The spillway was overflowing 8
inches deep and 10 feet wide.
And we're walking around
trying to get footage
of this amazing experience.
And it's daunting that
water is entering the pond
at eight different points.
And one single entry point
of water from those eight
could have filled the
whole thing on its own
in that amount of time.
And so we just watched
so much, so much water
leave this landscape.
[WATER RUNNING]
>> Your boots are
going to be so heavy.
[LAUGHTER]
>> From what was just like a big
hole in the ground that seemed
like it was going to be cool,
it's now this amazing mirror
of the sky and
aquatic ecosystem.
Today, I was just filming
just with my phone camera
some of the early
stages of succession
in the aquatic life, the little
zoo plankton scurrying around
along the banks.
There's just thousands, hundreds
of thousands, millions probably
of these life forms that have
just come out of nowhere.
I'm noticing a lot more birds.
Bird population is going up,
diversity of birds especially.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[BIRDS CHIRPING]
When you put a napkin
in a glass of water
and the water climbs up the
napkin, it's the same deal.
The landscape is the napkin
dipped into the glass of water.
And so now, it's
moving up slope.
Our garden is full of water.
These slopes are seeping
out water continuously.
We're finding water emerging
from areas higher up
in the landscape where I
haven't noticed before.
>> The dogs are
having so much fun.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Within the next decade, we
could expect to see this whole
valley greening up just
from this one event,
this just from
bringing water back.
And that's the
magic of water, is
that you let a land-- you
help a landscape to receive
water and hold it,
and then nature
does the rest of the
work because water
is the source of life.
And so that's the first step.
Just let the water return.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> My God.
>> By about day 5, I had settled
into the slowness of things--
the dry heat, the repetitive
steps, the routines.
And at that point, the
Aqueduct was mostly
underground, many millions
of gallons of water rushing
silently under our feet.
We wouldn't actually
see that water again
until we made it to the
Cascades just outside of LA.
>> I've been constantly amazed
at how much more I've learnt
about my surroundings by
just being at walking pace.
And I've also discovered much
to my delight and amusement
that everywhere is
in walking distance
if you give it enough time.
Look at this
beautiful little bird.
I think walking at the time
on a pace of our ancestors,
slowing down like this,
you become truly connected
to all life around you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In wilderness, in first
responder in a crisis,
the person who's looking to stop
the bleeding needs to be calm
and present and slow down in
order to be with the healing
of that wound.
So we're walking in that
way, and bearing witness
is part of that way.
>> The city of Los Angeles
allowed Owens Lake to go
completely dry.
The result of that was
a perennial dust storm.
That dust storm was identified
as the largest source
of what they call PM 10 in the
world, which is particulate
matter that some of which is
heavy metals and poisons that
are carcinogenic.
The federal government
and the State
of California at some point made
DWP, the city of Los Angeles,
mitigate that--
those dust storms.
They have now spent over
billion dollars mitigating
by flooding some sections,
establishing some bird habitat,
but mostly putting gravel on.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> They're tearing down the
whole mountainside up here
to put gravel out here.
We are where we've been
for thousands of years.
And I wake up every
morning, and I
look at the mountains
and go, that's
the same exact view that
my ancestors have looked
at for thousands of years.
And to me, that means a lot.
Our creation stories are
all based on this land
and where we are.
And I stress to people, how
do I teach my grandchildren
about who we are and to be
proud of who we are when
those things no longer exist?
There's no stories left
because those things are gone.
And when you've destroyed
that basic place--
sense of place, who are you?
That's a big question.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We've changed the surface of
the Earth in some pretty major
ways, erasing the stories
that make a place home
and habitable.
We've already turned nearly
half of the livable planet
into farmland and pasture.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> OK.
So a healthy, functioning
soil effectively
operates as a sponge does,
sort of in the same manner.
You have decomposed
organic matter, a humus.
You've got clay.
You've got silt, sand, loam.
You have all of
these different parts
and in certain percentages that
you'll find in different soils.
But it's the organic
matter content
and the life that accompanies
that organic matter that
allows it to be able to store
a certain amount of water.
>> You have to have
the bacteria and fungi.
Those organisms glue
themselves onto surfaces.
They're going to glue themselves
onto sands, onto silts,
onto clays, onto
organic material,
and they start holding
things around them.
It's going to start
building this aggregate.
And inside that aggregate,
all those little pores,
all those little spaces can hold
water, which, of course, is now
accessible to the root.
And your plants are
going to get that water.
Even though it may have been
dead dry for 10 days, 50 days,
90 days above
ground, there's still
water inside these
microaggregates
that your plant can get hold of.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Fungi, as they're growing,
they grow as long strands;
they're threads.
And so they're going to take
this little microaggregate
with the bacterial
community in there,
and it's going to pull that
in with one of its threads.
And over here, it's pulling
something else in and pulling
that in and pulling
that in, and now we're
making macroaggregates.
Bacteria make microaggregates.
Fungi pull all those
microaggregates together
and build macroaggregates.
Now, think of all the air
passageways, all the hallways,
all of that volume that
can get filled with water
and hold water.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
You have to have
the right biology.
But modern agriculture
has killed those organisms
by tilling too much, by using
manures that are high in salts.
Those organisms that we
require have been killed.
>> You basically have taken
living carbon-rich soils
and killed them through
excessive tillage and use
of chemicals into just dead
dirt instead of living soil.
And now, you have to
basically supplement.
You put those systems on
a form of life support.
It's chemotherapy basically.
>> The water that
falls in the sky free,
it all gets shunted off because
the soil quality is so poor.
It can't hold that water.
And of course, when
water leaves the farm,
it takes soil with it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[BIRDS CHIRPING]
>> Beautiful morning, isn't it?
>> We were never farmers and
we weren't trained as farmers,
and that's probably the blessing
is that we were never trained
as farmers and didn't
have a farming background.
So we came at it as ecologists,
as land regenerators.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[BIRDS CHIRPING]
If you have barren,
exposed soil,
you're going to have
wind and sun, both,
that'll help
volatilize nutrients
and moisture out of
the soil designating it
and robbing it of its nutrients.
And it will also make
the soil get much hotter
in daytime and colder at night.
Because it's bare and exposed,
the microbiology in the soil
doesn't like those
temperature shifts.
So simply, the top
few inches of soil
become uninhabitable
to microbiology.
What does tillage do?
It makes barren, exposed soil.
[BIRDS CHIRPING]
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah, we need small
leaves for the braising mix.
>> So those are still
good to bunch up,
and we'll use those bunches
for either family boxes
or for weekend farmer's
market, something like that.
>> If you can show them to--
>> That'd be great.
>> No bare soil anywhere.
Having constant vegetable cover
in our beds every single day
of the year, having
these mounted beds
and super high organic matters
that no water can move,
and then everything
that's not a bed
is either a hedgerow or a
green grass roadway or pathway.
There is no bare soil.
There are no bare roads
and bare dirt areas.
We really make sure to
have constant cover on soil
so that no soil can move and
become erosion and sediment.
It's all locked up and
bound up by the roots
of the various plants.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
These tomatoes and lettuce were
planted about two weeks ago.
On that day, we actually had a
cauliflower crop in this bed.
And that cauliflower was
harvested in the morning,
and then we cut the
cauliflower plants off
at ground level or just
below ground level,
leaving the entire
root structure intact
and the entire rhizosphere
around that root structure
intact and healthy and still
interacting with the roots.
Then we put down a fresh
layer of compost, about a half
an inch and transplanted in
the tomatoes and lettuces
same day as the
cauliflower came out.
So while you have this entire
cauliflower root structure
still intact in the ground
with a healthy rhizosphere,
we've just added new fresh
roots all over the bed
to interact with the
same rhizosphere,
creating this continuity
of soil health
that's never getting disturbed,
never getting affected,
never getting plowed or
tilled or blended up.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[BIRDS CHIRPING]
That was a perfect example of
what we'd do 95% of the time.
But there are those
times, like over here, we
had a bed that
overwintered with cabbages.
And it overwintered
and got very weedy.
And unfortunately,
we didn't want
to have to pull
out all the weeds
because if you pull out weeds,
you're removing all the topsoil
with the weed roots.
And if you cut off
the weeds, well,
they regrow better
than the vegetables do.
So in that case, this
bed, we're reclaiming it
through covering it with a
breathable landscape fabric.
So there's still oxygen
and gases exchange.
There's still moisture
exchange, and yet
the blocking of
sunlight is going
to decompose all the
weeds in place so
that after three or four
weeks of having a cover on,
we can peel back that
cover, and the bed
will be completely
clear and clean.
And the soil will be
like chocolate cake.
It'll be so gorgeous and so
dark and so healthy and so full
of biology and moisture.
And so once that cover has been
there for three or four weeks,
peel it off.
Put down a half inch of compost,
and transplant the next crop
right in there.
>> If we wanted, we could
peel off and dig in?
>> Probably not at this time
because none of them have been
covered for very long.
But this is a
possibility right here.
>> Right.
>> So this is an example of
what might happen after a couple
of weeks.
You can still see
some of the weeds
are still there and growing,
but they're very much
yellowing in place.
You can see there is quite a
lot of life happening in here.
>> Yeah, just look at that.
>> And you can see the soil
looks just like the chocolate
cake.
>> That's what you want to have
your growing soil look like all
the way down 12 inches down,
just beautiful, healthy,
rich soil.
>> So we might not even
have to add compost to this.
Especially if we're
doing quick crops,
we might just plant
straight into it.
Unfortunately, you didn't find
a worm when you were doing that.
>> I was looking.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[LAUGHS]
It's all about having
photosynthesis.
It's taking atmospheric
carbon that we
have too much of and sunlight,
which is free and abundant,
and creating nutrient packets
through photosynthesis
inside the plants.
Those nutrient packets
are then reformed
into amino acids and fatty
acids and waxes and proteins,
carbohydrates, and all different
kinds of nutrient packets.
Almost a half of the same
nutrient packets they make,
they actually exude to the
roots to feed the soil biology.
So if you want to
create healthy soil,
disturb it as
little as possible.
Keep it covered and protected.
And keep green living
plants in it all the time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So we are using maybe a seventh
or an eighth of the water
that we used to use for the same
crops in the same irrigation
system but different soil now.
We all say, well, to dry
farm plenty of our crops
as well as dry farm all of our
fruit trees and our hedgerows,
we're harvesting
52 weeks a year.
We are transplanting
We're sowing seeds in the
greenhouse 52 weeks a year
just on 3 acres.
So really, our
productivity on our acreage
matches that of a
15 to 25-acre farm.
And so rather than having 100
and 1,000-acre farms doing no
till vegetable production, why
don't we have 100 1 to 3-acre
farms that are within city
limits, providing food locally,
so there's cut out
transportation costs,
cut out fuel costs, and
start hiring local people
in the community to grow
the food for that community.
>> This is probably a few
acres of land that if this was
managed in a very intentional
focus particular way,
this space could not only be,
say, ecologically functional,
but it could also be a means
of feeding a sizable portion
of the folks who live
in this part of town.
And we could repeat that through
various parts of the city.
And every city
has a version of--
has some variation on the theme.
>> Now today is day 14,
I think, if I'm right.
>> What?
>> Day 14.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[SIREN WAILING]
>> My God.
[HELICOPTER ROTOR BLADES
WHIRLING]
>> So what we can do now?
[PENSIVE MUSIC]
>> As a result of
broken water cycles,
we have longer
droughts, hotter days,
and heavier winds that give rise
to more frequent and intense
wildfires.
Though, this isn't
the only reason
they're burning out of control.
[MUSIC PLAYING]